DIY Guide: Motion-Activated Security Light

Introduction
This guide helps you build a Motion-Activated Security Light using an Arduino Mega 2560, a PIR motion sensor, and an LED. Perfect for beginners, this project introduces basic electronics and programming concepts.

Components Needed

Arduino Mega 2560
PIR Motion Sensor
LED (any color)
Resistor (220Ω)
Breadboard (optional)
Jumper Wires
Step 1: Wiring Instructions

PIR Motion Sensor

VCC: Connect to the Arduino’s 5V pin.
GND: Connect to the Arduino’s GND pin.
OUT: Connect to Digital Pin 5.
LED with Resistor

Anode (long leg): Connect to Digital Pin 13 via a 220Ω resistor.
Cathode (short leg): Connect to GND.
Optional Breadboard Setup

Use a breadboard to organize the wiring:
5V pin: Connect to the positive rail.
GND pin: Connect to the negative rail.
Power the PIR sensor and LED from the rails.
Step 2: Upload the Code

Open the Arduino IDE.
Copy and paste the following code:
cpp
Copy code
void setup() {
  pinMode(13, OUTPUT);
  pinMode(5, INPUT);
  Serial.begin(9600);
}

void loop() {
  int value;
  value = digitalRead(5);
  Serial.println(value);
  if (value == 1) {
    digitalWrite(13, HIGH);
  } else {
    digitalWrite(13, LOW);
  }
}
Step 3: Testing the Circuit

Connect your Arduino Mega 2560 to your computer using a USB cable.
Wait for the PIR sensor to stabilize (approximately 30-60 seconds).
Monitor the LED behavior:
The LED will turn ON when motion is detected.
The LED will turn OFF when no motion is detected.
Troubleshooting Tips

Make sure all connections are tight and components are oriented correctly.
If the LED doesn’t light up, double-check the wiring, especially the connection to Digital Pin 13 and the resistor placement.
Ensure that the PIR motion sensor has enough time to stabilize before testing.
Summary
This simple DIY Motion-Activated Security Light is a great introduction to Arduino programming and basic electronics. Once you're comfortable with this setup, you can expand the project by adding more features, like an alarm or even wireless notifications for enhanced security.
